# Perspectives from other systems for establishing shared beliefs

Peer review is part of a larger system of rituals that scientists use to build consensus around beliefs. In reevaluating peer review, it is worth stepping back to evaluate how other systems establish consensus beliefs.

Justice systems investigate and seek to test hypotheses where lives hang in the balance: did someone ("a suspect") commit a criminal offense for which they should be punished. As anyone familiar with [procedural television dramas](./Notes.md#regarding-procedural-television-dramas) knows, the criminal justice system separates the roles of investigating crimes from those who prosecute the offenders, advocating for the conclusion of guilt. Since those who choose to investigate a suspect, and put in effort to conduct the investigation, may become invested in believing the hypothesis of guilt, someone more objective evaluates the collected evidence to decide whether it is strong enough to support advocating for the hypothesis of guilt (prosecution). Then, the prosecutor must advocate to a panel of members of the public, a jury, who make the final judgement.

From the perspective of those in criminal justice – with all its unjust flaws that corrupt and bias it – how much more corrupt science must seem; first, for allowing researchers to both investigate a hypothesis they are invested in and advocate for a conclusion; and second, for placing final judgement in the hands of anonymous investigators, some of whom may have advocated for (or still be advocating for) similar or competing conclusions. We should eschew practices that encourages scientists to draw judgments beyond that which is immediately inferrable from the evidence presented. We should also avoid practices that discard peers' insights into research and replace them with a boolean indicator of credibility (accept/reject) that we present as if it represented some broader scientific consensus.

We can also learn from journalists, who are also investigators who face decisions about what facts to treat as shared truths and who must reckon with their larger role of establishing shared beliefs. Those journalists who strive for impartiality (a valuable, if endangered, species) try to let the observations they report speak for themselves.

For a model of how we might prevent research from misleading without gatekeeping what gets published, we might look to how the most diligent journalists report on new scientific research: they reach out to multiple objective scientific experts, ask those experts to speak to the credibility of research and the conclusions that might be drawn from it, and quote those experts so that readers know exactly what they said. When experts use language that may be unfamiliar to a broader audience, the best journalists help make it understandable to that audience.

The model of investigative journalism is *elucidative*: it informs the audience about observed disagreements rather than declaring the winner.

Our practice of submitting research for exclusionary peer review, and gatekeeping for exclusionary peer review, demands that we scientists be investigators, advocates, and jurors. The latter two roles should give us pause. Science is more objective and credible when our role as investigators comes first.

The better we are able to investigate and elucidate our findings so that others can understand them, the better they can come to the most accurate conclusions on their own and build a shared consensus.

When conducting research as scientific investigators, we should be wary of any obligation to advocate for conclusions, especially those that promote the significance or importance of our results. When acting as peer reviewers to investigate others' work for errors, misleading statements, or other shortcomings, we should also be wary of any obligation to go beyond elucidating our findings, such as drawing conclusions about whether the work is worthwhile.
